---
title: "Rant on Crispr"
date: 2021-03-10
tags: ["science", "CRISPR"]
draft: false
---

You have heard about CRISPR, I suspect.  It is a gene-editing technology which can modify, delete or correct (modify) precise regions of DNA or RNA.  If you want a treatise on the interaction of DNA and RNA, let me know.  But in a drastic simplification: a DNA strand reproduces itself by breaking in specific places, uses RNA to make a copy of the DNA strands, and then reconnects the duplicated pieces to form a duplicate of the original.  (I omitted some intermediate steps for purposes of brevity).   I posted a brief animation of CRISPR in action with some annotations if you are interested:  https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=EF1oZKhMhq4

Whenever viruses attack certain bacteria, those bacteria “take a mugshot” of part of the DNA/RNA and they incorporate it into their own genetic material.  Since the “mugshot” is in the bacteria’s own DNA, it is passes along to future generations of that bacteria.  So that when the virus attacks later on, the bacteria or its offspring, remembers it.  It then uses a little guide RNA and a pair of "scissors" (an enzyme that acts as a pair of scissors) and cuts up the invading virus DNA/RNA.  Thus broken, it does not reproduce.  This is a little like I annotated in the YouTube video mentioned above.  So that allows the bacteria to have an adaptive immune system, meaning every time a new wave of that virus (and possibly many mutations of that original virus) comes along the bacteria and its offspring is pre-armed to fight the virus.  If a virus comes along that the bacteria is not prepared for, and if the bacteria find a new “scissors” it then can repeat the incorporation process I discussed above.

Once we have the sequence of a new attacking virus, with CRISPR, we can guess the place to modify the RNA (thus the term “modified RNA” or “mRNA”), and further with CRISPR we can make a modification to some RNA, and thus (with iterations) make a vaccine.  We then use existing technology (possibly using bacteria) to reproduce the vaccine and test the results.  (ain’t bacteria great!)

The CRISPR tool is a little like writing a computer program.   We code in the place we want the DNA cut.  Thus, we use this billion-year-old technique that bacteria use and reprogram some DNA or RNA so we can aim at any sequence of DNA or RNA we want to change in our own bodies.



Mutations:  As I see it in the popular press, they seem to be presenting it like the virus is actively trying variations to avoid our defenses.  Well that it not quite the way it works.  If you are old enough you may have seen people in office environment take a “xerox” copy of a document or more likely a picture, and copy the copy then copy that copy and etc.  You get further and further from the original due to copying imperfections.  Well, that is what viruses, bacteria and you do at the cell level.  Occasionally, the copy process (of the DNA) makes a mistake.  Not a designed mistake, just an error.   Those mistakes usually lead to a dead end, and do not reproduce themselves or reproduce without any beneficial impact.  Some are more successful in the environment:  they reproduce better, or survive better, or find hosts better.  Those are the “mutations” you are hearing about.  They are just successful mistakes.  (You have just had a cellular level discussion of evolution).  So far it seems that the mutations we are experiencing with COVID-19 are being addressed well by the current vaccines.  If we allow the COVID-19 to exist widespread in the world, then it becomes increasingly more likely that a reproduction error (thus mutation) will avoid the defenses of the current vaccines.  Hey, that is why it is important to vaccinate the world, not just our country.



What to do when the mutation avoids the current vaccine?  Well, we go back to that original CRISPR “program”, make a change, and produce an improved vaccine.  We can do this in a matter of days and get that into production in a small number of weeks.  The FDA has said they would require some testing of the new vaccine, but not as much as the original testing.  Thus, it is my speculation of an annual or bi-annual “booster”.   (Again, when you get your booster, remember my rant).



On the brighter side, eventually, we will be able to engineer tests kits directed to specific DNA or RNA chains.  These kits will likely be used in your home, and in just in a minute or so the user can detect the presence or absence not only of specific viruses (or flu which is a virus), you can detect bacteria, you could detect cancer (if the cells are easily accessed such as in fluids or stool), or analyze your gut microbiome.  Anything that is DNA related!  These home testing kits will help bring histology into our home without a microscope and bring us into a whole new era where we can do self-diagnosis of the things happening in our body.  I am in my late 70’s, but I would not be surprised to see some of this while I am around.  Now, you, I bet will see it, and when you do, remember this rant.